in 2003 the author Donald Miller
published his second book blue like jazz
and it came out to lackluster sales it
was selling a little bit but was pretty
slow and well below what he and his
publisher were hoping to accomplish with
this book and then suddenly after the
book had been out well over a year it
started selling and selling and then it
hit the New York Times bestseller list
and it went on to sell over 1.5 million
copies so what happened what took this
book that was Des to slide Into
Obscurity and suddenly help it find an
audience and take off well it all came
down to one tactic that the author did
that changed everything and it's a
tactic that any author can use and I'm
going to share that with you in this
video my name is Tim Gro I'm the CEO of
story grid and I'm the author of six
books including Running Down a Dream
your first 10,000 copies in my upcoming
novel the shithead now besides story
grid what I'm actually known for in the
publishing industry is bookmark
marketing I've been a book marketing
consultant for over 15 years I've
launched dozens of books to the top of
the New York Times Wall Street Journal
and other bestseller list and I've
trained thousands of authors on writing
and marketing their books as well and so
when I talk about this idea of book
marketing and the tactics that go into
it I know what I'm talking about I've
been doing this a really long time now
my partner Sean coin he's the Creator
and founder of story grit and he's an
editor and writer with over 30 years of
experience and he's been in publishing
since
1991 and so he has an extreme amount of
success and guidance that he can give us
when we're looking at putting books out
into the world as well and one of the
things he told me early on when we
started working together is that it's
easier to sell a book than to get
somebody to read it and I always thought
this was a little strange what are you
talking about it's it's harder to get
somebody to read your book than to give
you money for your book and he would say
yes and then I realized he is right so
let's take uh this book for example this
book is titled the Sans C we published
it here at story grid and it's a great
read it's a fantasy novel that's a mix
between Raiders of the Lost Arc and a
Game of Thrones I love this book and I
can't wait for the sequel the author is
working on it right now but look at this
thing it's over 700 pages long so let's
say you don't like fantasy books that
reading a fantasy book sounds awful to
you and I gave you a choice and I said
okay you can either get a free copy of
the sanc and read it or you can just
give me 30 bucks well most of you would
probably say I'd rather give you 30
bucks than have to read a book that I
don't want to actually read and then
there we have it it's easier to get
people to buy a book then actually sit
down and read it and this is the hard
thing about book marketing if somebody
comes to me and they say how can I sell
100,000 copies of my book the answer is
I don't know and if anybody tells you
otherwise they're full of shit they
don't know what they're talking about
because there is no direct way to sell a
100,000 copies of a book unless you're
planning on spending roughly seven
figures to Market that book so if you
don't have an extra million dollars or
more to Market your book the odds of you
being able to just directly sell 100,000
copies is basically zero and yet books
sell 100,000 copies so how does that
happen the only way a book can sell
100,000 copies or a million copies is
through word of mouth if somebody reads
a book and then tells five or 10 other
people about it that's the only way a
book really spreads so throughout my
time in publishing I kept hearing this
magic number of 10,000 10,000 you can
sell 10,000 copies of your book then
your book has a chance of going on to
sell and sell and sell and so what is it
about this 10,000 number what why does
that matter well that's the point where
you find out if your book actually has
legs if it's going to go out into the
world and keep selling because here's
the sad Truth for most books if 10
people read them they those 10 people
might tell one person maybe two but
maybe not any at all and then you have
books that if you can get 10 people to
read the book they'll go on to tell
another hundred people about the book
and so that's where Word of Mouth
actually kicks in so if we wonder how
these books that sell 10,000 ,000 or
20,000 copies go on to sell a 100,000 a
million copies well it's because of this
it's because the word of mouth kicked in
now how do you write a book so that when
one person reads it they will tell 10
other people well I'm going to come back
to that but before we can get there we
have to talk about piracy and to talk
about piracy we have to talk about the
FED fantasy author Neil Gaiman so Neil
Gaiman I saw an interview with him many
years ago and he gave this quote right
here then I started to notice two things
that seemed much more significant one of
which was that places where I was being
pirated particularly Russia where people
were translating my stuff into Russian
and spreading it out into the world I
was selling more and more books people
were discovering me through being
pirated and then they were going out and
buying the real books and when a new
book would come out in Russia it would
sell more and more copies Neil Gaiman
goes on to tell a story where it took
some convincing with his publisher but
he started giving away free ebook copies
of American Gods online just free copies
and this was a book that was selling
well so they gave away a bunch of free
copies online to anybody that wanted
them and then what happened well sales
of the book went up
300% and I've seen this over and over in
my 15 years in publishing where when a
book gets leaked or it starts getting
pirated and passed around all of a
sudden sales start going up up and they
start selling more and more copies so
what's going on here why is that piracy
causing more sales well we're back to
Word of Mouth somebody Pirates the copy
reads it loves it tells a bunch of
people they end up going and buying a
copy of the book just this year I have a
friend that's coming out with a book in
just a few weeks and he printed off and
gave away 8,000 early editions of his
book before it came out and it got so
popular that people were off offering to
buy copies of the Early Edition so they
could give it to other people and so he
gave away 8,000 copies before his book
came out and it's already driving a huge
amount of demand so now let's go back to
that story of Donald Miller and his book
blue like jazz so like I said the book
was not selling very well very
lackluster sales it was selling a little
bit but way under what he was expecting
what his publisher was expecting and
then all of a sudden it turned around
and started selling so what happened
what caused that spike in sales that
would go on to sell 1.5 million copies
of this book well a particular religious
organization that is active on campuses
college campuses all over the United
States really likeed this book and they
decided to give away a copy to all the
students that are in their organization
so they ended up giving away
150,000 copies of blue like jazz and
then this is what sparked the sales of
the book to where it went on to sell
500,000 then a million then 1.5 million
copies of the book and become a New York
Times bestseller so those people that
got the book for free read the book
loved it and started telling people
about the book and that's when the book
started selling and so here's the tactic
give your book Away literally give your
book away to anybody that you think will
read it it doesn't matter which format
ebook Audi book print it doesn't matter
give away as many copies as you possibly
can I'm doing this right now for my book
the shithead I've given away over 1,500
copies of that book over 300 of them
have been the paperback version of the
book and yes this isn't free I have to
pay to print the book and then ship out
the book to people but it's the cheapest
form of advertising because they're
going to read the book and they're going
to tell other people about the book you
literally cannot give away too many
copies of the book again think about
Donald Miller's story he gave away
150,000 copies and that's what sparked
all of the sales and so everything that
you hear about in marketing building an
email list blogging podcasting any of
these things you should think about it
as building an audience so that when you
have a book you can give it away to
people but the overarching goal of all
of this the thing you should always be
thinking is who is likely to like my
book who read it and like it and tell
other people I'm going to give them a
copy of the book and I'm just going to
give it to them so that they'll read it
and that word of mouth will start
spreading so now I have to address the
elephant in the room that giant 800lb
gorilla sitting in the corner how do you
write a book that people will actually
tell other people to read because like I
said most books if you get 10 people to
read them it's not going to turn into
word of mouth so how do you actually do
this and what I love is I'm already
seeing this happen with my book the
shithead so many of the people that I
gave early copies to they've come back
and asked if I can send a copy to a
friend or if they can give their ebook
copy to a friend of theirs and of course
my answer is always yes and I drop a
copy in the mail to their friend but I'm
seeing this happen I finally wrote a
book that I think other people are
actually going to tell people to read
and I'm seeing it happen in these early
days so what changed because this didn't
happen with my first novel if I got 10
people to read that book it did not turn
into 10 more or 100 more sales well I
focused on leveling up my skill skills
as a writer if you go back and read my
first novel the threshing and compare it
to what I wrote in the shithead it's so
much better because I focused on
leveling up my skills as a writer so
that's actually what we do here at story
grid is we help teach you the skills so
that you can level up your writing so
when you write a book it will be
something that readers will love will
change them will make them feel
something and be a book that they want
to give to other people and your book
can start spreading so I've got two
things for you if you want to take
advantage of this first of all I have a
13o scene writing checklist so when
we're teaching the skills of writing we
start with how to write a great scene
and we have 13 things that a scene has
to have in order to work really well and
you can download that right now by going
to story grid.com
checklist the second thing I have is the
story grid scene writing workshop and
you can go to story grid.com Workshop to
check that out this is a six- we scene
writing class that will change change
the way you write you can go there now
and see all of the testimonials of our
students but this has been a
lifechanging thing for so many of our
students where they learn more on
writing and they get better at their
writing in six weeks than the previous
years of trying to do it on their own so
I highly recommend you join us for that
at
storydark so that's the one big tactic
that if you don't know what to do with
your book marketing if you have a book
coming out and you're not sure what to
do the number one thing you can do
is connect with people that you think
will like it and then just give them a
copy and give away as many copies as you
can to people that you think will read
and enjoy your book now I'd love to hear
what you think about this idea so go
down in the comments and let me know
what you think about this one tactic for
marketing your book if you found this
helpful at all make sure you like And
subscribe to the channel so that you get
notified of all the future videos we
come out with and as always thanks for
being a writer thanks for being a part
of our community here at story grid and
I'll see you next time